docs/cookbooks/bootstrap_environments.md, before:

# Bootstrap Local and Dev Environments

Use these recipes to rebuild or verify the local sandbox and the shared dev environment.

## Prepare the required bundles (GCS)
See [Prepare Bootstrap Data Bundles](prepare_bootstrap_bundles.md) for instructions on generating, exporting, and uploading the data bundles required for bootstrapping.

## Local sandbox (I4G_ENV=local)

### Prerequisites
1.  **Conda Environment**: Ensure you are in the `i4g` environment.
2.  **Directory**: Run from the `core/` root.
3.  **Run Date**: Set the `RUN_DATE` environment variable (e.g., `2025-01-01`).

### Bootstrap Command
To fully reset the local sandbox (wipes and rebuilds SQLite, Chroma, OCR artifacts):

```bash
I4G_ENV=local i4g bootstrap local reset \
  --bundle-uri gs://i4g-dev-data-bundles/legacy_azure/$RUN_DATE/manifest.generated.json \
  --report-dir data/reports/local_bootstrap
```

### Partial Rebuilds
Skip heavy steps if you only need structured/vector data:

```bash
i4g bootstrap local reset --skip-ocr --skip-vector --report-dir data/reports/local_bootstrap
```

### Verification
To verify without regenerating data:

```bash
i4g bootstrap local reset --verify-only --smoke-search --smoke-dossiers
```

- Flags to know:
  - `--bundle-uri PATH` to stage a specific bundle into `data/bundles/`.
  - `--verify-only` to emit reports without regenerating data.
  - `--smoke-search` to run the Vertex search smoke; `--smoke-dossiers` (FastAPI running) to verify dossier manifests/signatures.
  - `--force` required if `I4G_ENV` is not `local` (use sparingly).
- After running:
  - Inspect `data/reports/local_bootstrap/` for JSON/Markdown reports (bundle hashes, manifest sha256, ingestion-run summary, smokes).
  - Point ingestion/search to the refreshed dataset (`ingestion.default_dataset`).
  - Run a quick smoke: [docs/cookbooks/smoke_test.md](docs/cookbooks/smoke_test.md).

## Dev environment (I4G_ENV=dev)

### Prerequisites
1.  **GCloud Auth**: You must be authenticated with `gcloud` and have access to the `i4g-dev` project.
    ```bash
    gcloud auth login
    gcloud auth application-default login
    gcloud config set project i4g-dev
    ```
2.  **Impersonation**: You need to impersonate the infra service account for Bootstrap operations.
    ```bash
    gcloud config set auth/impersonate_service_account sa-infra@i4g-dev.iam.gserviceaccount.com
    ```

### Bootstrap Command
To reset the dev environment by triggering Cloud Run jobs (standard procedure):

1.  **Set the Run Date**: Identify the date of the legacy Azure bundle you wish to restore (e.g., `2025-01-01`).
    ```bash
    export RUN_DATE="2025-01-01"
    ```

2.  **Run Bootstrap**:
    ```bash
    I4G_ENV=dev i4g bootstrap dev reset \
      --bundle-uri gs://i4g-dev-data-bundles/legacy_azure/$RUN_DATE/manifest.generated.json \
      --dataset legacy_azure_$RUN_DATE \
      --run-smoke \
      --run-dossier-smoke \
      --run-search-smoke
    ```

    *   This command triggers Cloud Run jobs to rehydrate Firestore, Vertex AI, and BigQuery.
    *   It runs smoke tests immediately after to verify health.
    *   Reports are saved to `data/reports/dev_bootstrap/`.

### Verification Only
If you only want to run the smoke tests without rebuilding data:

```bash
I4G_ENV=dev i4g bootstrap dev verify \
  --run-smoke \
  --run-dossier-smoke \
  --run-search-smoke
```

### Debugging: Local Execution
To run the ingestion logic **locally** on your machine but target the Dev environment's infrastructure (Firestore, Vertex AI). This is useful for debugging ingestion logic without waiting for Cloud Run job scheduling or container builds.

> **Note**: This requires your local credentials to have permission to write to Dev Firestore and Vertex AI.

```bash
I4G_ENV=dev i4g bootstrap dev reset \
  --local-execution \
  --bundle-uri gs://i4g-dev-data-bundles/legacy_azure/$RUN_DATE/manifest.generated.json \
  --dataset legacy_azure_$RUN_DATE \
  --run-smoke
```

### Job Reference
The bootstrap process orchestrates several Cloud Run Jobs. These jobs are defined in `infra/` (Terraform) and built from `core/docker/`.

| Job Name | Docker Image | Purpose |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `bootstrap-firestore` | `ingest-job.Dockerfile` | Loads case metadata into Firestore. |
| `bootstrap-vertex` | `ingest-job.Dockerfile` | Generates embeddings and upserts to Vertex AI Search. |
| `bootstrap-sql` | `ingest-job.Dockerfile` | Writes structured data to Cloud SQL (Postgres). |
| `bootstrap-bigquery` | `ingest-job.Dockerfile` | Loads analytics data into BigQuery. |
| `bootstrap-reports` | `report-job.Dockerfile` | Generates dossiers and investigation reports. |
| `bootstrap-saved-searches` | `account-job.Dockerfile` | Seeds default saved searches and tag presets. |
| `process-intakes` | `intake-job.Dockerfile` | Processes new intake submissions (used in smoke tests). |

> **Note**: The `ingest-job` image is versatile and handles multiple backends (Firestore, Vertex, SQL) based on environment variables passed by the job definition.

### Troubleshooting
If you encounter issues with `gcloud` versions or job execution failures, see the [Troubleshooting Guide](#troubleshooting-bootstrap).

## Troubleshooting Bootstrap

### Manual Job Execution (GCloud Fallback)
If `gcloud run jobs execute` fails with `Unknown name "delayExecution" at 'overrides'` (seen in gcloud 550.0.0), either downgrade gcloud (e.g., 549.0.0) or call the Cloud Run Jobs API directly.

1.  **List Jobs**:
    ```bash
    gcloud run jobs list --project i4g-dev --region us-central1 --format='table(name)'
    # Example: ingest-azure-snapshot, generate-reports, process-intakes
    ```

2.  **Execute via API**:
    ```bash
    ACCESS_TOKEN=$(gcloud auth print-access-token --impersonate-service-account sa-infra@i4g-dev.iam.gserviceaccount.com)
    JOB=ingest-azure-snapshot
    
    curl -s -X POST \
      -H "Authorization: Bearer $ACCESS_TOKEN" \
      -H "X-Goog-User-Project: i4g-dev" \
      -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
      "https://run.googleapis.com/v2/projects/i4g-dev/locations/us-central1/jobs/$JOB:run" \
      -d '{"overrides":{"containerOverrides":[{"args":["--bundle-uri=gs://i4g-dev-data-bundles/legacy_azure/$RUN_DATE/manifest.generated.json","--dataset=legacy_azure_$RUN_DATE"]}]}}'
    ```

### Finding Vertex Data Store ID
If you need to manually find the Vertex data store ID:

```bash
ACCESS_TOKEN=$(gcloud auth print-access-token)
curl -s \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $ACCESS_TOKEN" \
  -H "X-Goog-User-Project: i4g-dev" \
  "https://discoveryengine.googleapis.com/v1/projects/i4g-dev/locations/global/collections/default_collection/dataStores" \
  | jq -r '.dataStores[]? | "\(.name|split("/")[-1])\t\(.displayName)"'
```
Dev default: `retrieval-poc` with serving config `default_search`.

- Guardrails and outputs:
  - Blocks prod-like projects unless `--force` and warns if `I4G_ENV` is not `dev`/`local`.
  - Logs bundle URI and sha256 when `--bundle-uri` points to a local file; pass `--dataset` and `--bundle-uri` so every job sees the same inputs.
  - Reports (JSON + Markdown) land in `data/reports/dev_bootstrap/` with job status and smoke results. Search smoke is skipped unless both `--search-data-store-id` and `--search-serving-config-id` are provided.
  - **Inspect Outcomes**:
    - Check `data/reports/dev_bootstrap/dev_bootstrap_report.md` for a summary of all job executions and smoke test results.
    - Review `data/reports/dev_bootstrap/dev_bootstrap_report.json` for detailed machine-readable logs, including specific error messages if any step failed.
    - If the intake smoke passed, you can verify the created case in the analyst console or by querying the API directly using the `intake_id` from the logs.

## Notes and further reading
- Avoid hand-editing `data/`; rerun the bootstrap scripts for reproducibility. Keep `config/settings.local.toml` aligned when overriding paths and regenerate manifests with `scripts/export_settings_manifest.py` if needed.
- Design/background: see [Bundle Sources and Synthetic Coverage](../development/bundle_sources_and_coverage.md) for source inventory, licensing, and synthetic coverage scope.

Commit message:

refactor(ingest): stream data from GCS instead of baking into image
Updates ingestion job to stream JSONL files from GCS, reducing Docker image size and enabling dynamic dataset updates. Also updates bootstrap commands and fixes .gcloudignore to include necessary source code.

docs/cookbooks/bootstrap_environments.md, after:

# Bootstrap Local and Dev Environments

Use these recipes to rebuild or verify the local sandbox and the shared dev environment.

## Prepare the required bundles (GCS)
See [Prepare Bootstrap Data Bundles](prepare_bootstrap_bundles.md) for instructions on generating, exporting, and uploading the data bundles required for bootstrapping.

## Local sandbox (I4G_ENV=local)

### Prerequisites
1.  **Conda Environment**: Ensure you are in the `i4g` environment.
2.  **Directory**: Run from the `core/` root.
3.  **Run Date**: Set the `RUN_DATE` environment variable (e.g., `2025-01-01`).

### Bootstrap Command
To fully reset the local sandbox (wipes and rebuilds SQLite, Chroma, OCR artifacts):

```bash
I4G_ENV=local i4g bootstrap local reset \
  --bundle-uri gs://i4g-dev-data-bundles/legacy_azure/$RUN_DATE/manifest.generated.json \
  --report-dir data/reports/local_bootstrap
```

### Partial Rebuilds
Skip heavy steps if you only need structured/vector data:

```bash
i4g bootstrap local reset --skip-ocr --skip-vector --report-dir data/reports/local_bootstrap
```

### Verification
To verify without regenerating data:

```bash
i4g bootstrap local reset --verify-only --smoke-search --smoke-dossiers
```

- Flags to know:
  - `--bundle-uri PATH` to stage a specific bundle into `data/bundles/`.
  - `--verify-only` to emit reports without regenerating data.
  - `--smoke-search` to run the Vertex search smoke; `--smoke-dossiers` (FastAPI running) to verify dossier manifests/signatures.
  - `--force` required if `I4G_ENV` is not `local` (use sparingly).
- After running:
  - Inspect `data/reports/local_bootstrap/` for JSON/Markdown reports (bundle hashes, manifest sha256, ingestion-run summary, smokes).
  - Point ingestion/search to the refreshed dataset (`ingestion.default_dataset`).
  - Run a quick smoke: [docs/cookbooks/smoke_test.md](docs/cookbooks/smoke_test.md).

## Dev environment (I4G_ENV=dev)

### Prerequisites
1.  **GCloud Auth**: You must be authenticated with `gcloud` and have access to the `i4g-dev` project.
    ```bash
    gcloud auth login
    gcloud auth application-default login
    gcloud config set project i4g-dev
    ```
2.  **Impersonation**: You need to impersonate the infra service account for Bootstrap operations.
    ```bash
    gcloud config set auth/impersonate_service_account sa-infra@i4g-dev.iam.gserviceaccount.com
    ```

### Bootstrap Command
To reset the dev environment by triggering Cloud Run jobs (standard procedure):

1.  **Set the Run Date**: Identify the date of the legacy Azure bundle you wish to restore (e.g., `2025-01-01`).
    ```bash
    export RUN_DATE="2025-01-01"
    ```

2.  **Run Bootstrap**:
    ```bash
    I4G_ENV=dev i4g bootstrap dev reset \
      --bundle-uri gs://i4g-dev-data-bundles/legacy_azure/$RUN_DATE/manifest.generated.json \
      --dataset legacy_azure_$RUN_DATE \
      --run-smoke \
      --run-dossier-smoke \
      --run-search-smoke
    ```

    *   This command triggers Cloud Run jobs to rehydrate Firestore, Vertex AI, and BigQuery.
    *   It runs smoke tests immediately after to verify health.
    *   Reports are saved to `data/reports/dev_bootstrap/`.

### Verification Only
If you only want to run the smoke tests without rebuilding data:

```bash
I4G_ENV=dev i4g bootstrap dev verify \
  --run-smoke \
  --run-dossier-smoke \
  --run-search-smoke
```

### Debugging: Local Execution
To run the ingestion logic **locally** on your machine but target the Dev environment's infrastructure (Firestore, Vertex AI). This is useful for debugging ingestion logic without waiting for Cloud Run job scheduling or container builds.

> **Note**: This requires your local credentials to have permission to write to Dev Firestore and Vertex AI.

```bash
I4G_ENV=dev i4g bootstrap dev reset \
  --local-execution \
  --bundle-uri gs://i4g-dev-data-bundles/legacy_azure/$RUN_DATE/manifest.generated.json \
  --dataset legacy_azure_$RUN_DATE
```

### Troubleshooting: IAP Authentication
If you encounter authentication issues with Cloud Run services (e.g., 401/403 errors during smoke tests), you can use the `debug_iap.py` script to verify token generation and audience configuration.

```bash
# Run the debug script
python scripts/debug_iap.py
```

This script checks:
1.  Your current gcloud identity.
2.  Ability to generate ID tokens for the IAP audience.
3.  Connectivity to the `fastapi-gateway` service.

  --local-execution \
  --bundle-uri gs://i4g-dev-data-bundles/legacy_azure/$RUN_DATE/manifest.generated.json \
  --dataset legacy_azure_$RUN_DATE \
  --run-smoke
```

### Job Reference
The bootstrap process orchestrates several Cloud Run Jobs. These jobs are defined in `infra/` (Terraform) and built from `core/docker/`.

| Job Name | Docker Image | Purpose |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `bootstrap-firestore` | `ingest-job.Dockerfile` | Loads case metadata into Firestore. |
| `bootstrap-vertex` | `ingest-job.Dockerfile` | Generates embeddings and upserts to Vertex AI Search. |
| `bootstrap-sql` | `ingest-job.Dockerfile` | Writes structured data to Cloud SQL (Postgres). |
| `bootstrap-bigquery` | `ingest-job.Dockerfile` | Loads analytics data into BigQuery. |
| `bootstrap-reports` | `report-job.Dockerfile` | Generates dossiers and investigation reports. |
| `bootstrap-saved-searches` | `account-job.Dockerfile` | Seeds default saved searches and tag presets. |
| `process-intakes` | `intake-job.Dockerfile` | Processes new intake submissions (used in smoke tests). |

> **Note**: The `ingest-job` image is versatile and handles multiple backends (Firestore, Vertex, SQL) based on environment variables passed by the job definition.

### Troubleshooting
If you encounter issues with `gcloud` versions or job execution failures, see the [Troubleshooting Guide](#troubleshooting-bootstrap).

## Troubleshooting Bootstrap

### Manual Job Execution (GCloud Fallback)
If `gcloud run jobs execute` fails with `Unknown name "delayExecution" at 'overrides'` (seen in gcloud 550.0.0), either downgrade gcloud (e.g., 549.0.0) or call the Cloud Run Jobs API directly.

1.  **List Jobs**:
    ```bash
    gcloud run jobs list --project i4g-dev --region us-central1 --format='table(name)'
    # Example: ingest-azure-snapshot, generate-reports, process-intakes
    ```

2.  **Execute via API**:
    ```bash
    ACCESS_TOKEN=$(gcloud auth print-access-token --impersonate-service-account sa-infra@i4g-dev.iam.gserviceaccount.com)
    JOB=ingest-azure-snapshot
    
    curl -s -X POST \
      -H "Authorization: Bearer $ACCESS_TOKEN" \
      -H "X-Goog-User-Project: i4g-dev" \
      -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
      "https://run.googleapis.com/v2/projects/i4g-dev/locations/us-central1/jobs/$JOB:run" \
      -d '{"overrides":{"containerOverrides":[{"args":["--bundle-uri=gs://i4g-dev-data-bundles/legacy_azure/$RUN_DATE/manifest.generated.json","--dataset=legacy_azure_$RUN_DATE"]}]}}'
    ```

### Finding Vertex Data Store ID
If you need to manually find the Vertex data store ID:

```bash
ACCESS_TOKEN=$(gcloud auth print-access-token)
curl -s \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $ACCESS_TOKEN" \
  -H "X-Goog-User-Project: i4g-dev" \
  "https://discoveryengine.googleapis.com/v1/projects/i4g-dev/locations/global/collections/default_collection/dataStores" \
  | jq -r '.dataStores[]? | "\(.name|split("/")[-1])\t\(.displayName)"'
```
Dev default: `retrieval-poc` with serving config `default_search`.

- Guardrails and outputs:
  - Blocks prod-like projects unless `--force` and warns if `I4G_ENV` is not `dev`/`local`.
  - Logs bundle URI and sha256 when `--bundle-uri` points to a local file; pass `--dataset` and `--bundle-uri` so every job sees the same inputs.
  - Reports (JSON + Markdown) land in `data/reports/dev_bootstrap/` with job status and smoke results. Search smoke is skipped unless both `--search-data-store-id` and `--search-serving-config-id` are provided.
  - **Inspect Outcomes**:
    - Check `data/reports/dev_bootstrap/dev_bootstrap_report.md` for a summary of all job executions and smoke test results.
    - Review `data/reports/dev_bootstrap/dev_bootstrap_report.json` for detailed machine-readable logs, including specific error messages if any step failed.
    - If the intake smoke passed, you can verify the created case in the analyst console or by querying the API directly using the `intake_id` from the logs.

## Notes and further reading
- Avoid hand-editing `data/`; rerun the bootstrap scripts for reproducibility. Keep `config/settings.local.toml` aligned when overriding paths and regenerate manifests with `scripts/export_settings_manifest.py` if needed.
- Design/background: see [Bundle Sources and Synthetic Coverage](../development/bundle_sources_and_coverage.md) for source inventory, licensing, and synthetic coverage scope.
