docs/dev_guide.md, before:

# Developer Guide — Intelligence for Good (i4g)

This Developer Guide explains how to set up, run, and extend the i4g platform — an experimental system for detecting, analyzing, and reporting online scams (especially crypto and romance scams targeting seniors).

---

## System Overview

i4g combines OCR, language models, semantic entity extraction, classification, and human-in-the-loop review to support law enforcement and victim assistance workflows.

### Core Data Flow

```mermaid
graph TD
A[Chat Screenshots] --> B[OCR (Tesseract)]
B --> C[Semantic Extraction (LangChain + Ollama)]
C --> D[Classification (Rule + LLM)]
D --> E[Ingestion to Knowledge Base]
E --> F[Analyst Review API / Dashboard]
F --> G[Law Enforcement Report Generator]
```

---

## Project Layout

```
i4g/
├── src/i4g/
│   ├── ocr/                # OCR via Tesseract
│   ├── extraction/         # NER + Semantic Extraction
│   ├── classification/     # Fraud classifiers
│   ├── embedding/          # Vector embeddings
│   ├── store/              # Vector + Structured + Review DB
│   ├── rag/                # RAG pipeline & retrieval
│   ├── reports/            # Report generation & GDoc export
│   ├── review/             # FastAPI review service
│   ├── worker/             # Background tasks (report gen)
│   └── ...
├── tests/
│   ├── unit/
│   └── adhoc/
├── templates/              # Jinja2 report templates
└── scripts/                # CLI & dev utilities
```

---

## Setup Instructions

### Prerequisites

- macOS or Linux (Apple Silicon M3 tested)
- Python ≥ 3.11
- Tesseract OCR installed (`brew install tesseract`)
- Ollama running locally (`ollama serve`)
- FAISS (for vector store)
- Optional: Google Cloud SDK (for GDoc export)

### Environment Setup

```bash
git clone https://github.com/jsoung/i4g.git
cd i4g
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -U pip
pip install -e .
```

To test your setup:

```bash
pytest -q
```


## Running the Core Pipelines

There are also targeted demos under `tests/adhoc/` if you want to exercise a single feature (OCR, extraction, reporting, etc.); check the README in that folder for usage details.

### OCR + Extraction

```bash
python scripts/run_ocr_pipeline.py --input ./samples/chat_001.png
```

### Semantic NER + Classification

```bash
python scripts/run_semantic_extraction.py --input ./samples/text/
python scripts/classify_text.py "This looks like a scam."
```

### Scam Detection RAG Query

```bash
python scripts/scam_detection_cli.py "Is this a crypto scam?"
```

---

## Analyst Review System

### Backend API

Run the review backend:

```bash
uvicorn i4g.review.api:app --reload
```

Check endpoint:
```
http://localhost:8000/docs
```

### Streamlit Analyst Dashboard

```bash
streamlit run tests/adhoc/analyst_dashboard_demo.py
```

**Streamlit Analyst Dashboard**

- **Launch UI:** `streamlit run tests/adhoc/analyst_dashboard_demo.py` (full workflow for claiming, accepting, and rejecting cases).
- **Search faster:** blend vector + structured lookups, adjust result counts, and paginate without re-running queries; hits tally shows total coverage.
- **Saved search controls:** tag-based grouping, quick presets, CSV export, rename/share/delete, and bulk tag edits directly in the sidebar.
- **Audit trail:** every run lands in `/reviews/search/history`; preview previous runs or replay them from the recent history panel.

---

## Report Generation

### Manual Report Preview

```bash
python tests/adhoc/manual_report_demo.py
```

### GDoc Export (if Google API configured)

```bash
python scripts/export_report_gdoc.py --case-id CASE123
```

---

## Developer Utilities

**Core Scripts**

- **Build FAISS index:** `python scripts/build_index.py --backend faiss --reset`
- **Run unit tests:** `pytest -v`
- **Format source:** `black src tests`
- **Snapshot context:** `bash scripts/generate_context_snapshot.sh --help`

**Saved Search Admin (`i4g-admin`)**

- `i4g-admin export-saved-searches --owner alice --output alice.json`
- `i4g-admin import-saved-searches --shared --input team.json`
- `i4g-admin bulk-update-tags --owner alice --tags urgent wallet --remove legacy`
- `i4g-admin prune-saved-searches --owner alice --tags legacy`

Install locally with `pip install -e .` to expose `i4g-admin` everywhere; run `i4g-admin --help` to browse each subcommand.

---

## Notes for Cloud Deployment

- Production environment expected to run on Linux (GCP or AWS).
- Review API and worker tasks should run as services.
- GDoc exporter requires Google service account credentials.
- Use `docker/` folder for containerized deployment (optional).

Commit message:

Removed local test database from git

docs/dev_guide.md, after:

# Developer Guide — Intelligence for Good (i4g)

This Developer Guide explains how to set up, run, and extend the i4g platform — an experimental system for detecting, analyzing, and reporting online scams (especially crypto and romance scams targeting seniors).

---

## System Overview

i4g combines OCR, language models, semantic entity extraction, classification, and human-in-the-loop review to support law enforcement and victim assistance workflows.

### Core Data Flow

```mermaid
graph TD
A[Chat Screenshots] --> B[OCR (Tesseract)]
B --> C[Semantic Extraction (LangChain + Ollama)]
C --> D[Classification (Rule + LLM)]
D --> E[Ingestion to Knowledge Base]
E --> F[Analyst Review API / Dashboard]
F --> G[Law Enforcement Report Generator]
```

---

## Project Layout

```
i4g/
├── src/i4g/
│   ├── ocr/                # OCR via Tesseract
│   ├── extraction/         # NER + Semantic Extraction
│   ├── classification/     # Fraud classifiers
│   ├── embedding/          # Vector embeddings
│   ├── store/              # Vector + Structured + Review DB
│   ├── rag/                # RAG pipeline & retrieval
│   ├── reports/            # Report generation & GDoc export
│   ├── review/             # FastAPI review service
│   ├── worker/             # Background tasks (report gen)
│   └── ...
├── tests/
│   ├── unit/
│   └── adhoc/
├── templates/              # Jinja2 report templates
└── scripts/                # CLI & dev utilities
```

---

## Local Datastore

The `i4g_store.db` file is a local SQLite database used for storing application data, including:

-   **Structured Data:** Extracted entities, classification results, and other structured information.
-   **Vector Embeddings:** Embeddings of text for semantic search.
-   **Review Data:** Data for the analyst review system.

This file is created automatically when you run the application and is not meant to be shared or committed to version control. If you want to start with a fresh database, you can delete this file.

---

## Setup Instructions

### Prerequisites

- macOS or Linux (Apple Silicon M3 tested)
- Python ≥ 3.11
- Tesseract OCR installed (`brew install tesseract`)
- Ollama running locally (`ollama serve`)
- FAISS (for vector store)
- Optional: Google Cloud SDK (for GDoc export)

### Environment Setup

```bash
git clone https://github.com/jsoung/i4g.git
cd i4g
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -U pip
pip install -e .
```

To test your setup:

```bash
pytest -q
```


## Running the Core Pipelines

There are also targeted demos under `tests/adhoc/` if you want to exercise a single feature (OCR, extraction, reporting, etc.); check the README in that folder for usage details.

### OCR + Extraction

```bash
python scripts/run_ocr_pipeline.py --input ./samples/chat_001.png
```

### Semantic NER + Classification

```bash
python scripts/run_semantic_extraction.py --input ./samples/text/
python scripts/classify_text.py "This looks like a scam."
```

### Scam Detection RAG Query

```bash
python scripts/scam_detection_cli.py "Is this a crypto scam?"
```

---

## Analyst Review System

### Backend API

Run the review backend:

```bash
uvicorn i4g.review.api:app --reload
```

Check endpoint:
```
http://localhost:8000/docs
```

### Streamlit Analyst Dashboard

```bash
streamlit run tests/adhoc/analyst_dashboard_demo.py
```

**Streamlit Analyst Dashboard**

- **Launch UI:** `streamlit run tests/adhoc/analyst_dashboard_demo.py` (full workflow for claiming, accepting, and rejecting cases).
- **Search faster:** blend vector + structured lookups, adjust result counts, and paginate without re-running queries; hits tally shows total coverage.
- **Saved search controls:** tag-based grouping, quick presets, CSV export, rename/share/delete, and bulk tag edits directly in the sidebar.
- **Audit trail:** every run lands in `/reviews/search/history`; preview previous runs or replay them from the recent history panel.

---

## Report Generation

### Manual Report Preview

```bash
python tests/adhoc/manual_report_demo.py
```

### GDoc Export (if Google API configured)

```bash
python scripts/export_report_gdoc.py --case-id CASE123
```

---

## Developer Utilities

**Core Scripts**

- **Build FAISS index:** `python scripts/build_index.py --backend faiss --reset`
- **Run unit tests:** `pytest -v`
- **Format source:** `black src tests`
- **Snapshot context:** `bash scripts/generate_context_snapshot.sh --help`

**Saved Search Admin (`i4g-admin`)**

- `i4g-admin export-saved-searches --owner alice --output alice.json`
- `i4g-admin import-saved-searches --shared --input team.json`
- `i4g-admin bulk-update-tags --owner alice --tags urgent wallet --remove legacy`
- `i4g-admin prune-saved-searches --owner alice --tags legacy`

Install locally with `pip install -e .` to expose `i4g-admin` everywhere; run `i4g-admin --help` to browse each subcommand.

---

## Notes for Cloud Deployment

- Production environment expected to run on Linux (GCP or AWS).
- Review API and worker tasks should run as services.
- GDoc exporter requires Google service account credentials.
- Use `docker/` folder for containerized deployment (optional).
