docs/retrieval_gcp_guide.md, before:

# GCP Retrieval Guide — Vertex AI Search PoC

This guide documents the Google Cloud workflow for the Retrieval proof of concept. It covers the Terraform-provisioned Discovery data store, the Python ingestion and query helpers, and day-to-day troubleshooting. Keep this separate from the local sandbox guide to avoid mixing laptop-only steps with hosted services.

---

## Prerequisites

- `infra/environments/dev` Terraform stack applied (creates the Discovery data store `retrieval-poc`).
- Application Default Credentials available on your workstation with the quota project set: `gcloud auth application-default set-quota-project i4g-dev`.
- Active Python environment `i4g` with the dependencies from `pyproject.toml` installed (`google-cloud-discoveryengine>=0.15,<1`).
- Access to `data/retrieval_poc/cases.jsonl` (generated by the synthetic dataset scripts).

---

## Ingestion Script

Use `scripts/ingest_vertex_search.py` to load the JSONL cases into the hosted data store.

```bash
python scripts/ingest_vertex_search.py \
    --project i4g-dev \
    --location global \
    --data-store-id retrieval-poc \
    --jsonl data/retrieval_poc/cases.jsonl
```

Key flags:

- `--dry-run` — parse the first record and log the protobuf payload without calling Discovery.
- `--batch-size` — tune the number of documents sent per import batch (default 50).
- `--reconcile-mode` — choose between incremental and full replacement (`INCREMENTAL` by default).

What changed recently:

- Each document now sets `Document.content` with UTF-8 raw bytes and `mime_type="text/plain"`, satisfying Discovery’s unstructured content requirement.
- Dry-run logging uses the underlying protobuf message for stable JSON dumps (`proto-plus` wrappers lack a `DESCRIPTOR`).

After a successful run you should see log lines similar to:

```
INFO Batch 1 completed: success=50 failure=0
INFO Ingestion complete: 200 succeeded, 0 failed, total input 200
```

If `error_samples` are reported, rerun with `--verbose` and check the payload for malformed fields.

---

## Query Script

`scripts/query_vertex_search.py` performs ad-hoc searches against the data store. Basic usage:

```bash
python scripts/query_vertex_search.py \
    "wallet address verification" \
    --project i4g-dev \
    --location global \
    --data-store-id retrieval-poc \
    --page-size 5
```

### Filters

Discovery filter syntax is strict about spacing. Arrays such as `tags` require the `ANY` operator **with a space on both sides of the colon**:

```bash
python scripts/query_vertex_search.py \
    "verification" \
    --project i4g-dev \
    --location global \
    --data-store-id retrieval-poc \
    --filter 'tags: ANY("account-security")'
```

If the service returns `Unsupported field "tags" on ":" operator`, double-check the colon spacing.

### Boosting

Rank adjustments can be tested without changing the hosted configuration by passing `--boost-json`:

```bash
python scripts/query_vertex_search.py \
    "verification" \
    --project i4g-dev \
    --location global \
    --data-store-id retrieval-poc \
    --boost-json '{"conditionBoostSpecs": [{"condition": "tags: ANY(\"romance\")", "boost": -0.5}]}'
```

The script JSON-parses the payload and merges it into `SearchRequest.BoostSpec`, allowing quick experiments with positive or negative boosts.

### Raw Output

Add `--raw` to print the full protobuf response as JSON. This is useful for debugging filterable fields (`structData`, `rankSignals`, etc.).

---

## Analyst Dashboard Integration

Run the Streamlit dashboard with `streamlit run src/i4g/ui/analyst_dashboard.py` to let analysts exercise the hosted search without touching the CLI. A new *Discovery (Vertex AI) search* panel sits near the top of the main view and accepts the same parameters as the CLI helper:

- Project, location, data store ID, and serving config (defaults pull from environment variables when available).
- Free-text query, optional filter expression, and optional BoostSpec JSON payload for ranking experiments.
- Page size picker plus a toggle to expose the raw JSON response for each hit.

Results show the summary, tags, structured payload, and rank signals, and you can download the raw response blob for sharing in Slack or attaching to tickets.

---

## Schema & Filter Reference

The data store currently uses the auto-generated `default_schema`. You can inspect it with:

```bash
python - <<'PY'
from google.cloud import discoveryengine_v1beta as discoveryengine

client = discoveryengine.SchemaServiceClient()
name = "projects/544936845045/locations/global/collections/default_collection/dataStores/retrieval-poc/schemas/default_schema"
print(client.get_schema(name=name).json_schema)
PY
```

Fields such as `tags`, `category`, `structured_fields.asset`, and `entities.crypto_assets.value` are marked `dynamicFacetable` and `searchable`, meaning they support filters and boosts directly.

---

## Troubleshooting Checklist

- **No results** — Verify ingestion succeeded (`error_samples` should be empty) and re-run the query with `--raw` to confirm hits exist.
- **Filter errors** — Ensure `tags: ANY("value")` spacing matches the schema; the parser rejects `tags:"value"`.
- **Boost payload failures** — `--boost-json` must be valid JSON; the script will exit with an explanatory message if parsing fails.
- **Credential issues** — Refresh ADC with `gcloud auth application-default login` and confirm the quota project is set.

---

## Quick Smoke Test

Run the wrapper below before a major checkpoint to confirm both ingestion parsing and hosted search stay healthy:

```bash
python scripts/smoke_vertex_retrieval.py \
    --project i4g-dev \
    --location global \
    --data-store-id retrieval-poc
```

The script performs a dry-run ingest on `data/retrieval_poc/cases.jsonl` and then issues a search against the `default_search` serving config. It exits non-zero if parsing fails or the query returns zero documents, giving you one command to spot regressions.

---

## Relevance Baseline

Use the evaluation helper to track a lightweight relevance baseline across common scam scenarios:

```bash
python scripts/evaluate_vertex_search.py \
    --project i4g-dev \
    --location global \
    --data-store-id retrieval-poc
```

By default the script runs four canned queries (wallet verification, romance visa pretext, investment pump room, and tech-support remote access) and reports whether a matching document appears within the top five results. Provide `--config path/to/scenarios.json` to override or extend the scenario list; each entry can specify the query, optional filter, expected document ids/tags/labels, and the acceptable rank cut-off (`pass_k`). The process exits with a non-zero code if any scenario fails, making it suitable for manual checkpoints or future CI automation.

---

## Next Steps

- [ ] Add GitHub Actions job that runs `scripts/smoke_vertex_retrieval.py` and `scripts/evaluate_vertex_search.py` against a fixture data store
- [x] Add `i4g-admin` command to query Vertex Search with saved filters
- [ ] Surface Discovery hits in the React analyst UI once the panel design is finalized
- When the schema diverges from the default, export the custom schema to `infra/` so Terraform keeps the configuration synced.

Commit message:

Added dual write of evidence artifacts

docs/retrieval_gcp_guide.md, after:

# GCP Retrieval Guide — Vertex AI Search PoC

This guide documents the Google Cloud workflow for the Retrieval proof of concept. It covers the Terraform-provisioned Discovery data store, the Python ingestion and query helpers, and day-to-day troubleshooting. Keep this separate from the local sandbox guide to avoid mixing laptop-only steps with hosted services.

---

## Prerequisites

- `infra/environments/dev` Terraform stack applied (creates the Discovery data store `retrieval-poc`).
- Application Default Credentials available on your workstation with the quota project set: `gcloud auth application-default set-quota-project i4g-dev`.
- Active Python environment `i4g` with the dependencies from `pyproject.toml` installed (`google-cloud-discoveryengine>=0.15,<1`).
- Access to `data/retrieval_poc/cases.jsonl` (generated by the synthetic dataset scripts).

---

## Ingestion Script

Use `scripts/ingest_vertex_search.py` to load the JSONL cases into the hosted data store.

```bash
python scripts/ingest_vertex_search.py \
    --project i4g-dev \
    --location global \
    --data-store-id retrieval-poc \
    --dataset retrieval_poc \
    --jsonl data/retrieval_poc/cases.jsonl
```

Key flags:

- `--dry-run` — parse the first record and log the protobuf payload without calling Discovery.
- `--batch-size` — tune the number of documents sent per import batch (default 50).
- `--reconcile-mode` — choose between incremental and full replacement (`INCREMENTAL` by default).
- `--dataset` — optional identifier that is injected into each document when the JSONL record omits a
    `dataset` field (useful for synthetic bundles that predate the dataset metadata).

What changed recently:

- Each document now sets `Document.content` with UTF-8 raw bytes and `mime_type="text/plain"`, satisfying Discovery’s unstructured content requirement.
- Dry-run logging uses the underlying protobuf message for stable JSON dumps (`proto-plus` wrappers lack a `DESCRIPTOR`).

After a successful run you should see log lines similar to:

```
INFO Batch 1 completed: success=50 failure=0
INFO Ingestion complete: 200 succeeded, 0 failed, total input 200
```

If `error_samples` are reported, rerun with `--verbose` and check the payload for malformed fields.

### Document Contract Updates (new)

The downstream dual-write pipeline and the Vertex import script now expect a few additional metadata
fields so Discovery filters can target specific bundles and indicator groups:

- `dataset` — identifier describing the source bundle (e.g., `retrieval_poc`). The ingestion job
    injects this automatically via `prepare_ingest_payload(..., default_dataset=...)`, so CLI runs only
    need to supply the dataset name via `I4G_INGEST__DATASET_NAME` or the JSONL records themselves.
- `categories` — normalized list of scam categories/tags. The helper inspects `categories`,
    `category`, and `tags` fields to ensure Discovery receives a consistent array for filtering.
- `indicator_ids` — stable IDs for any structured indicators the case generated. JSONL records can
    provide explicit IDs; otherwise, metadata dictionaries with `indicator_id`, `id`, or `value`
    entries are promoted into a flat list.

When you run `scripts/ingest_vertex_search.py`, the `structData` payload now includes these keys for
every document, enabling precise filters such as `dataset: ANY("retrieval_poc") AND indicator_ids:
ANY("wallet_verification")`. The ingestion worker (`i4g-ingest-job`) reuses the same builder so
real-time dual-write runs push the enriched documents to Vertex without invoking the standalone
script.

---

## Query Script

`scripts/query_vertex_search.py` performs ad-hoc searches against the data store. Basic usage:

```bash
python scripts/query_vertex_search.py \
    "wallet address verification" \
    --project i4g-dev \
    --location global \
    --data-store-id retrieval-poc \
    --page-size 5
```

### Filters

Discovery filter syntax is strict about spacing. Arrays such as `tags` require the `ANY` operator **with a space on both sides of the colon**:

```bash
python scripts/query_vertex_search.py \
    "verification" \
    --project i4g-dev \
    --location global \
    --data-store-id retrieval-poc \
    --filter 'tags: ANY("account-security")'
```

If the service returns `Unsupported field "tags" on ":" operator`, double-check the colon spacing.

### Boosting

Rank adjustments can be tested without changing the hosted configuration by passing `--boost-json`:

```bash
python scripts/query_vertex_search.py \
    "verification" \
    --project i4g-dev \
    --location global \
    --data-store-id retrieval-poc \
    --boost-json '{"conditionBoostSpecs": [{"condition": "tags: ANY(\"romance\")", "boost": -0.5}]}'
```

The script JSON-parses the payload and merges it into `SearchRequest.BoostSpec`, allowing quick experiments with positive or negative boosts.

### Raw Output

Add `--raw` to print the full protobuf response as JSON. This is useful for debugging filterable fields (`structData`, `rankSignals`, etc.).

---

## Analyst Dashboard Integration

Run the Streamlit dashboard with `streamlit run src/i4g/ui/analyst_dashboard.py` to let analysts exercise the hosted search without touching the CLI. A new *Discovery (Vertex AI) search* panel sits near the top of the main view and accepts the same parameters as the CLI helper:

- Project, location, data store ID, and serving config (defaults pull from environment variables when available).
- Free-text query, optional filter expression, and optional BoostSpec JSON payload for ranking experiments.
- Page size picker plus a toggle to expose the raw JSON response for each hit.

Results show the summary, tags, structured payload, and rank signals, and you can download the raw response blob for sharing in Slack or attaching to tickets.

---

## Schema & Filter Reference

The data store currently uses the auto-generated `default_schema`. You can inspect it with:

```bash
python - <<'PY'
from google.cloud import discoveryengine_v1beta as discoveryengine

client = discoveryengine.SchemaServiceClient()
name = "projects/544936845045/locations/global/collections/default_collection/dataStores/retrieval-poc/schemas/default_schema"
print(client.get_schema(name=name).json_schema)
PY
```

Fields such as `tags`, `category`, `structured_fields.asset`, and `entities.crypto_assets.value` are marked `dynamicFacetable` and `searchable`, meaning they support filters and boosts directly.

---

## Troubleshooting Checklist

- **No results** — Verify ingestion succeeded (`error_samples` should be empty) and re-run the query with `--raw` to confirm hits exist.
- **Filter errors** — Ensure `tags: ANY("value")` spacing matches the schema; the parser rejects `tags:"value"`.
- **Boost payload failures** — `--boost-json` must be valid JSON; the script will exit with an explanatory message if parsing fails.
- **Credential issues** — Refresh ADC with `gcloud auth application-default login` and confirm the quota project is set.

---

## Quick Smoke Test

Run the wrapper below before a major checkpoint to confirm both ingestion parsing and hosted search stay healthy:

```bash
python scripts/smoke_vertex_retrieval.py \
    --project i4g-dev \
    --location global \
    --data-store-id retrieval-poc
```

The script performs a dry-run ingest on `data/retrieval_poc/cases.jsonl` and then issues a search against the `default_search` serving config. It exits non-zero if parsing fails or the query returns zero documents, giving you one command to spot regressions.

---

## Relevance Baseline

Use the evaluation helper to track a lightweight relevance baseline across common scam scenarios:

```bash
python scripts/evaluate_vertex_search.py \
    --project i4g-dev \
    --location global \
    --data-store-id retrieval-poc
```

By default the script runs four canned queries (wallet verification, romance visa pretext, investment pump room, and tech-support remote access) and reports whether a matching document appears within the top five results. Provide `--config path/to/scenarios.json` to override or extend the scenario list; each entry can specify the query, optional filter, expected document ids/tags/labels, and the acceptable rank cut-off (`pass_k`). The process exits with a non-zero code if any scenario fails, making it suitable for manual checkpoints or future CI automation.

---

## Next Steps

- [ ] Add GitHub Actions job that runs `scripts/smoke_vertex_retrieval.py` and `scripts/evaluate_vertex_search.py` against a fixture data store
- [x] Add `i4g-admin` command to query Vertex Search with saved filters
- [ ] Surface Discovery hits in the React analyst UI once the panel design is finalized
- When the schema diverges from the default, export the custom schema to `infra/` so Terraform keeps the configuration synced.
